good luck everyone
i've got it
got it
uh
good morning everybody just waiting to
let everybody in
oh are we are we full my tires
i think it would be good to wait to wait
one minute
at least yeah
i think everyone has arrived so
fantastic thank you
good morning good morning everybody it's
lovely to see or a whole load of people
who have been with us from the beginning
and also new faces and new names
um i welcome you to the lsc anthropology
department
and the fifth in our series of seminars
to pay tribute to our friend and
colleague david greber
i'm alpha i'm a professor in the
anthropology department here and i'm
chairing this series
today we will discuss
a pamphlet that david published way back
in 2004
with prickly paradigm press
called fragments of an anarchist
anthropology
uh this short booklet is
to my mind at least foundational
for charting the path that david david
would develop
in later work
some of the key theoretical ideas
actually flower in the just published
dawn of everything
17 years later
um
and
you know were seated i mean they were
seated in fragments and then watered
over the years in david's other writings
in fragments david asks the question
what sort of social theory would
actually be of interest to those who are
trying to help bring about a world
in which people are free to govern
their own affairs
it is here that he makes the case for
anthropology
being particularly well placed to offer
possibilities
alternatives to the world we live in
and it is here that he makes the case
for anthropologists to make common cause
with anarchists
to use the tools we have for human
freedom
it's a kind of manifesto
in fact
he does call section of it sections of
it tiny manifestos for anthropology
we're fortunate today to have two
brilliant anthropologists to discuss
fragments with us
so let me introduce them to you
the first is care martin a professor of
social anthropology at the university of
oslo
kier is currently leading a research
project on the spread of psychotherapy
among the growing middle classes of asia
and is himself a qualified
psychotherapist
his earlier work focused on contests
over the limits of reciprocal obligation
and their role in shaping the boundaries
of business and other social entities
he conducted his main field work in east
new britain province papua new guinea
on which he wrote a book called the
death of the big man and the rise of the
big shots
custom and conflict in new east britain
in east new britain
now as the title suggests this work
focuses on the emergence of new forms of
social stratification in papua new
guinea
which is fascinating of course to us as
papua new guinea is a place that is
famous for giving rise to
anthropological theories of reciprocity
and mutual obligation which at the
center of um fragments
care charts how this social
stratification
how with this social stratification
comes the rise of contested assertions
of individual autonomy
and he explores how people seek freedom
from customary obligation as a key
constituent of that emerging
stratification
so yeah you can see why
his work makes him particularly well
placed here particularly well placed to
provide a critical engagement with
david's thoughts
we also have with us aicha shubachu who
is our colleague here in the sociology
department
where she is associate professor in
human rights and co-directs lsc human
rights
aisha's doctoral foundations are in
anthropology and her book for the love
of humanity the world tribunal on iraq
is based on two years of ethnographic
fieldwork with the global anti-war
movement that emerged in response to the
occupation of iraq in 2003 and that
sought to provide grounds for
adjudicating war crimes committed by the
us the uk and their allied forces during
the iraq war
aicha based her field fieldwork amongst
a decentralized network of anti-war
activists in 20 cities around the world
and her book is an illumination of the
tribunal as a sympathetic participant
and a reflection on the challenges of
forging global solidarity against
imperialism
so you can see why archer is
wonderfully placed to be commenting on
on david's work
especially this text
both of our speakers have of course done
much much more and wear many hats and
have both have written for wider publics
but importantly both were good friends
of david
i should met david as part of new york
city's direct action network in the
early 2000s and they taught together a
seminar at the breck forum in new york
on john holloway's book change the world
without taking power the meaning of
revolution today
this intellectual and political
friendship continued when they became
colleagues
we all became colleagues at the lsc
david and care
met at a conference on debt a subject on
which care has also done some excellent
work
but they were really drawn together by
their joint interest in calling to
account what was going on at the journal
how a journal that david had prominently
supported in its early days
as the how affair receded other shared
interests took over
they were intellectually engaged in the
work of the psychoanalyst
donald winnicott
and a relational theory of the mind
which they hoped to write about together
thank you care thank you aicha for
joining us i'll first give the floor to
care for 20 minutes then to aisha and
then we will open up for comments and
questions from the floor
thank you
care over to you
okay you need to unmute yourself please
i
can't hear you
of course the unmute button was now
hidden under the bottom of the taskbar
despite having been doing this for two
years i'm still
messing it up on a serial basis so
apologies to everyone so now uh let me
segue back into thank you so much alpha
for that very very kind introduction and
um
without further ado let me begin with
the task i've been set so
fragments of an anarchist anthropology
is a book that fizzes with a
multiplicity of ideas so many in fact
that they seem on occasion to overgrow
the boundaries of the text
and in the book we see many themes that
were to be developed in more detail in
later years in books such as debt the
first 000 years jobs and his
posthumous magnum opus co-authored with
david wengrow the dawn of everything a
new history of humanity
all of the different overflowing themes
share a common underlying thread however
namely a desire to learn from and
explore the multiplicity of alternatives
to hierarchy and competition that are
already in existence often right
underneath our noses rather than lay
down a fixed template for resistance
rather than trying to resolve the
leninist question of what is to be done
david continuously asks his readers to
reflect upon the implications of what is
already being done
and it is in this regard that david's
anarchism and his anthropology must
clearly complement each other
by slowing down and paying attention to
the variety of ways in which people step
outside of and subvert hierarchy in
order to make a life more worth living
anthropology might david argues become
the liberatory discipline par excellence
if only its practitioners were able to
realize the potential power within their
practice
so let me take just one example from
fragments on page 60 david discusses the
italian autonomous theory of
revolutionary exodus a theory itself
inspired by a previous refusal of large
numbers of young italians to engage in
wage labor
david writes that
in all of this italy seems to have acted
as a kind of laboratory for future
social movements anticipating trends
that are now beginning to happen on a
global scale
now if this was true when david wrote
fragments back in 2004 how much more so
is it the case today when the so-called
great resignation poses the greatest
threat to the return of business as
usual in the aftermath of the coveted 19
lockdowns
a quick scan of headlines on national
public radio in the us for example tells
the story business should be booming if
only there are enough workers for the
job or as the pandemic recedes millions
of workers are saying i quit
and why are they quitting
i think the pandemic has changed my
mindset in a way like i really value my
time says jonathan caballero a 27 year
old software engineer who previously
commuted 45 minutes each way to work on
a daily basis
now i believe that work has to
accommodate life elisa casey a
researcher for the federal government
states that i think the pandemic just
allowed for time you just have more time
to think about what you really want
an npr reports of 42 year old restaurant
manager jeremy golombiewski and his
decision to join the great resignation
in the months that followed covid
gonobiski's life changed he was spending
time doing fun things like setting up a
playroom in his garage for his two young
children and cooking dinner for the
family at age 42 he got a glimpse of
what life could be like if he didn't
have to put in 50 to 60 hours a week at
the restaurant and miss thanksgiving
dinner and christmas morning with his
family
i want to see my one-year-old and my
five-year-olds faces light up when they
come out and see the tree and all the
presents that i spent six hours at night
assembling and putting out says
golombieski
who got his first restaurant job at 16
as a dishwasher at the big boy chain in
michigan
so golombieski apparently comes from
humble origins but even high-end
executives are not immune from the
humanizing influence of lockdown
will station a vice president of boeing
is reported by npr as quote becoming
emotional realizing how much of his
children's lives he previously missed
and how much he's going to experience
now
i got to see my kids and see their world
in a way that i'd never experienced
before he says it's very special
even with all the chaos this has been a
bonus year for me
now npr also reports in june that people
quitting jobs in normal times would
signal a healthy economy but these are
not normal times the pandemic in fact
led to the worst recession in u.s
history and still a record 4 million
quit their jobs in april
and the situation
has continued in the months since
the great resignation appears to be
getting worse complaining kylie logan
and lance lambert on the fortune 500
news website
two authors who for some reason seem
unhappy but thousands of men such as
station and gombieski are discovering
the joy of spending irreplaceable time
with their growing children
and so in september a new record of 4.4
million resignations were recorded
now the great resignation is one of
those phenomena that shows most clearly
i'd argue the interconnection of aspects
of life that are often kept conceptually
separate
we see for example in the examples above
not simply an individualistic take this
job and shove it kind of mood but also
the ways in which the refusal of work
seems to open the possibility for
reimagining gendered relations of
kinship and care
relations anthropologists have long
argued that intimately and unavoidably
entwined with the world of paid
employment
now there's quite a bit of talk in last
week's seminar of the way in which david
was skeptical of the kind of great
transformation picture of the emergence
of capitalist modernity that is an
otherwise conventional framing for many
of us in political economic anthropology
and indeed in fragments david is quite
explicit about this skepticism stating
that and i quote almost everyone agrees
that somewhere in the 16th or 17th or
18th centuries a great transformation
occurred that it occurred in western
europe and its settled colonies and that
because of it we became modern and that
once we did we became a fundamentally
different sort of creature than anything
that had come before
but what if we kicked this whole
apparatus away
it's worth making the point however
the davis argument was not as he also
put it quote that nothing important has
happened over the past 500 years
any more than i'm arguing that cultural
differences are unimportant
his argument rather was that once we
drop the assumption that this always has
to be the starting framing of analysis
and once we decide to and again i quote
at least entertain the notion that we
aren't quite so special as we'd like to
think we can also begin to think about
what really has changed and what
so hasn't
david alternatives to what we think we
are can potentially be found in our
present daily practice they don't
necessarily have to be sought before the
total transformation of the rise of
capitalism
or after the great transformation of the
total revolution that is yet to come
davey was concerned with the way in
which the fetishization of something
called the market or the economy as
separate from the rest of society
prioritize particular relational
obligations over others
not least the way in which it meant that
life had to accommodate work and not the
other way around as criticized by
caballero
and this is of course in many regards an
eminently palanium critique of the
performative effects of the rhetorical
disemboding of disembedding of the
market economy from society and the
consequence setting up of that market
economy a society's driving institution
and david was also always keen to point
out that in our daily practice that
market rationality relies upon always in
poland's terms still embedded within
other moral perspectives and practices
both david and palani knew that any
transformation that might have occurred
in recent centuries great or otherwise
could never ultimately create an economy
with the people left out and any attempt
to do so was doomed to be nothing but a
shallow liberal utopia
and so
although the great resignation came as a
surprise to many one suspects it would
not have come as a surprise to david
naughty pallangie who might well have
seen it as an example of the famous
double movement by which society in this
case in the shape of golombieski station
and millions more like them protect
themselves from a disembedded market
morality and begin to prioritize the
reproduction of persons over the
production of objects in economic value
for david it would have been further
proof if more were needed but something
radically different to what we think we
have to be now has been within us and in
front of us all along
we might well find radical difference
before the great transformation after
the revolution or indeed at the end of a
tributary of the amazon river but we
don't necessarily have to go looking
there we're as likely to find such
differences in an amazon distribution
center as long as we know how to look
and david was of course fascinated by
the grand historical narratives and the
reassuring the exotic ethnographic
examples upon which this discipline is
built
he wouldn't have spent so long
conducting field work on magic in
madagascar or researching the role of
wampum in early american colonial
contacts if he wasn't interested in such
things
but he also pointed out that assuming
that these were the only potential
points in which radical difference could
be observed meant that we were likely to
overlook them in other spaces
david did feel that the most common use
of anthropology by radicals and
anarchists the vision of the egalitarian
hunter-gatherer paradise was of limited
value
i don't think we're losing much if we
admit that human beings never really
lived in the garden of eden he argues in
fragments
again presaging the more fully worked
out and demonstrated the argument
underpinning the dawn of everything
examples from different times and places
are not necessarily to be used david
argues as examples or templates of
things called anarchist societies to be
contrasted as what david describes as
imaginary totalities to our own
and indeed
whatever new forms of society sociality
that you and i and station and gombieski
and all the rest of us may build in the
future it's unlikely to look much like
the kung sao the binding
and such romantic appropriations are
indeed vulnerable to a number of
conservative objections
so in order to give up hierarchy we have
to give up antibiotics and central
heating and clean water too
the alternative that you have to offer
stationed in gonoviewski is that they
establish an imaginary totality called
an anarchist society that goes endlessly
wandering across the orange county in
search of nuts and berries
if this is the only or the main use that
radicals or anarchists can make of the
anthropological record
then doesn't they implicitly accept or
at the very least strengthen the
teleology that the dawn of everything
sets out to weaken
namely even if our past might have been
a russoian paradise rather than a
hobbsian nightmare
that social complexity and technology by
their very definition require ever more
complex and technologically developed
forms of monitoring control discipline
hierarchy and oppression
instead if as david suggested fragments
we knock down the walls in that thought
that separate complex from simple
societies or indeed separate the west
from the rest but maybe this can as he
puts it allow us to see this history as
a resource
in much more interesting ways
so when david introduces the example of
the italian autonomous engagement draw i
mentioned earlier he does it immediately
after a discussion of cassio eckham's
analysis of the congo monarchy as an
empty shell that people simply withdrew
from
what relevance might this historical
practice happen today david asks
taking the walls of separation between
an opposition between italian modernity
and congolese non-modernity for granted
means that we almost inevitably start
our analysis for looking for the radical
difference that we assume must be hidden
within
but knocking down the conceptual walls
enables us to see it from a different
perspective and to see something that
often gets missed a shared desire for
greater freedom and attention to the
reproduction of magnitude human
relations that both of these withdrawals
embody
and throughout fragments david uses such
examples but repeatedly in a manner
designed to stress the ways in which
they might to some extent at least
express such common shared human desires
differences exist of course differences
of culture differences of perspective
differences of power differences of
privilege for an anarchist like david
that almost went without saying
but they are differences that come in
and out of being in shifting contexts
not the expression of a historical
essentialised cultural difference that
can only ever be understood by a small
quota of scholars who would be able to
see over the wall that separates western
rest
and they are often the most important
differences of those that emerge within
and from within oneself such as the
shift in perspective when men such as
those mentioned above begin to see their
children and their own lives in a
different light
and attempt to withdraw from the
obligations that seek to nullify that
new perspective and if we can't see how
radical and potentially important that
is is that simply because so many of us
have naturalized and now failed to even
notice the essentially bizarre character
of capitalist cosmology
it is a cosmology that in some forms
after all insists that we must believe
in the existence of a mysterious cosmic
invisible hand that would distribute
goods to us in a fair and efficient
manner
at least if we worship it properly by
amongst other things sacrificing our
children to it in the form of giving up
so much mutually valuable and precious
life enriching time with them
in order to appease its jealous demands
in the form of the labor market this is
on reflection a cosmology as wild and
exotic and as fascinating as anything to
be found in the ethnographic record
and david would point out that the
rejection of it we see today is
therefore potentially a profound and
revolutionary one but one that is far
less likely to be taken seriously in
some corners of our discipline but is
still wedded to what arjun apadurai
famously referred to as sightings of the
savage as its default mode of
intellectual or political critique
i should note in passing
that david would probably not have been
too pleased with me for wheeling out
apadurai in defense of his position
it would be fair to say that david was
not exactly a fan a few weeks ago and i
hope chris doesn't mind me sharing his
story a few weeks ago chris gregory
mentioned having initially thought that
david was something of a artist
and i can indeed confirm the truth of
this account the first time i met david
was at a conference in cambridge about
10 years ago chris and david and i were
bulleted together at a college some
distance from the other participants and
so we spent quite a bit of time together
chris would really complain to me after
breakfast that it was bad enough having
to listen to david all day at the
conference but having to endure it first
thing in the morning before he'd even
woken up properly was quite another
thing altogether
and then when chris was out of the room
david started talking to me very
excitedly about how thrilled he was to
be hanging out with the author of his
very favorite book gifts and commodities
and how dishonest and uncorrect he felt
that happened critique of it in the
social life of things had been
as the most junior person in the room it
was a slightly difficult and awkward
situation to manage although i wasn't
surprised to hear that chris had come
around to being a huge fan of david's a
few years later
david was on occasion a difficult man to
converse with particularly before he'd
have breakfast
but i knew that the quality and ambition
of david's work would prove irresistible
to chris in the long run and in the
following years david would occasionally
ask us rhetorically why do they always
refer to me with a sneer as the
anarchist anthropologist why not always
refer to abolish and apadurai as the
neoliberal anthropologist it's just as
accurate but it doesn't get constantly
attached to his name as a pejorative in
the same way
now of course david knew he's been
slightly disingenuous here apadurai
after all hadn't authored a book
entitled fragments of a neoliberal
anthropology
so whether or not david was correct to
label him as such it's not surprising
that such a label was slightly less
easily attached to him when it was to
david
but the underlying point that david was
making that david's scholarship was
endlessly and subtly sneered at and
undermined by repeatedly introducing him
as such even when it wasn't necessarily
relevant was a valid and important point
to make
and it was typical of david but rather
than shy away from the association with
anarchist theory an association that he
knew would be used to belittle him and
his work that he instead chose to take
that prejudice on head first early in
his career before he had the security of
tenure
the book that came out of this fragments
is a book that i found a little
frustrating on first read i found the
way in which it jumped from point to
point and back again a little well
fragmentary
and much as i'm sure that david was
aware that there was a certain paradox
in the author of a book entitled
fragments of an anarchist anthropology
subsequently complaining that people
refer to him as the anarchist
anthropologist i was aware i was to an
extent missing the point by feeling
frustrated at the fragmentary nature of
a book with the same title
i felt myself to be in a similar
position to the kind of american tourist
one occasionally overhears in copenhagen
loudly complaining that the statue of
the little mermaid is too small
but on second reading however i got on
with the book a lot better
as with a conversation with david in
real life
one simply had to allow himself to go
with the flow and if one did it was a
conversational experience like no other
like chris i thought david would be
perhaps a little much on first meeting
particularly before i had a chance to
have my first cup of coffee
but in later years as i got to know
david better i looked forward to those
wonderful rambling conversations that
went from ray davis from luke onto
rodney dangerfield and then back home
via a detail to discuss 18th century
madagascan pirates
and i think david's intellectual range
sometimes irritated those who envied it
and wanted to put him back into the
narrow arid scripture scholarship of the
intellectual silos that they had settled
for
the kinds of people who write things in
anonymous peer review such as i can't
believe that the author of this paper on
value seems totally unaware of
malinowski's seminal footnotes on trophy
and yam exchange from 1937.
and i suspect what upset those kinds of
people most about david was that they
knew he probably was aware of those
precious little nuggets of knowledge
that they curated it was just that as he
always did he chose to go his own way
and make his own connections instead
and in many regards i would argue that
is david's greatest gift to the academy
we all know that this is a profession in
which success is often driven by
networks by nepotism and by ass kissing
more than it is driven by the alleged
liberal values of free thought and
intellectual inquiry
and in such a context david stood out by
his consistent refusal to ever do
anything but his own thing
i'm sure it made him a frustrating
colleague at times
but as we all know the category of good
colleague is a double-edged sword
sometimes it means the person who turns
their marking in on time and i would not
be surprised to hear from former
colleagues that sometimes david's
contempt for what he might be was the
parts of his job on occasion
might have left other people picking up
the pieces
but let us also remember that all too
often being a good colleague means being
the person who turns a blind eye to the
bad behavior and abuse on the part of
senior or powerful colleagues out of a
desire to protect the institution
and after years in this profession my
skin tends to crawl when i hear senior
colleagues praise the virtues of
collegiality
my first instinct is to wonder whose
body are we burying or whose mouth are
we taping up today
and i remain immensely grateful to david
for consistently prioritizing being a
good person over being a good colleague
in that respect
and on occasion i miss him very much
but with fragments we have something
that keeps something of that spirit of
david alive
it's irreverent it's bursting with ideas
and most of all it's principle
whether we all agree with all those
principles or not
there's a wonderful spirit of freedom in
this short book a spirit of freedom the
senior academics often tell us that we
need to squeeze out of ourselves as the
price of a mission to the ivory towers
and the greatest gift i think that david
gave us with fragments of anarchist
anthropology is the enduring proof that
we don't have to listen to them
thank you care
that was marvelous um so needed big
context
uh as political as fragments uh what we
need right now um aicha over to you
thank you first of all uh very many
thanks to alpa and the department of
anthropology at lsc for organizing this
series this tribute to our dear friend
and colleague
david graber
i'm gonna read as well i'm going to be
referring to david as graber
because it's uh still very difficult for
me to speak about him
so i'll try to distance myself a little
bit hopefully not too much
published in 2004 in the inspirational
context of a veritably exploding
anarchism around the world
david graber's fragments of an anarchist
anthropology is a tiny and mighty
genre-defying text
graper calls it a pamphlet
a series of thoughts sketches or
potential theories and tiny manifestos
the pamphlet is impossible to summarize
and discuss fully in 20 minutes
especially since in hindsight it bears
the seeds of many of the major arguments
scraper was to develop later in life
i will therefore limit myself to
sketching only the basics of the kind of
social theory that graber is proposing
in the spirited text
broadly fragments seeks to outline a
body of radical theory that would in his
words
actually be of interest to those who are
trying to help bring about a world in
which people are free to govern their
own affairs
this is characteristic of graper the
desire to render social theory
particularly anthropology
usefully interesting to radical
movements and radical moons particularly
anarchism useful and interesting to
social theory
in the fragments graber explores what he
names the strange affinity between
anarchism and anthropology
he observes there was something about
anthropological thought in particular
its keen awareness of the very range of
human possibilities that gave it an
affinity to anarchism from the beginning
graper himself was fascinated by this
the range of human possibilities in the
past and the present
which could unravel the seeming
inevitability of our current social and
political institutions
while grounding hope for living
collectively with greater freedom in
more egalitarian arrangements
but graber is able to observe the
strange affinity between anthropology
and anarchism in the fragments because
in his version anarchism is not about a
body of theory be created in the 19th
century by founding figures such as
bakunin kropotskin and prodone that one
would have to adopt wholesale
instead it is more about a particular
attitude even a faith he says that is
shared among anarchists
anarchism can be thought of as a faith
grave research which involves i called
the rejection of certain types of social
relations the confidence that certain
others would be much better ones on
which to build a livable society and the
belief that such a society could
actually exist
likewise the founding figures of
anarchism did nothing they invented
anything new they simply made a faithful
assumption that in graeber's words the
basic principles of anarchism
self-organization voluntary association
mutual aid referred to forms of human
behavior they assumed to have been
around as long as humanity
the same goes for the rejection of the
state and all forms of structural
violence inequality or domination encode
arguably it is this assumption about
human history that graber sets out to
prove valid in his latest book the dawn
of everything a new history of humanity
which he co-authored with the
archaeologist david wengrow who is
here with us today
humanity has always practiced
anarchistic forms of human behavior and
social organization
since the ice age
in graper's vision in any case
anthropology as a discipline could
strengthen faith in the possibility of
another world by offering an archive of
alternative ways of organizing social
relations of reconstituting them
consciously or of abundant them
altogether
but to be able to strengthen this faith
in the possibility of another world free
from the state capitalism
racism and male dominance social theory
itself would have to assume another
world is possible
in fact graber asserts this as the first
assumption that any radical social
theory has to make
to commit oneself to such a principle is
almost an act of faith he finds since
how can one have certain knowledge of
such matters
it might possibly turn out he says that
such a world is not possible
on code
in a move that resembles a sophisticated
theological argument about the existence
of god he then declares
it's this very unavailability of
absolute knowledge which makes a
commitment to optimism a moral
imperative
i wonder however if anthropologists or
others can be drawn into such faithful
optimism by argumentation
perhaps one could be inspired to have
faith in the possibility of another
world
but inspired david greber did along with
the radical movements he dearly
treasured
greber's second proposition is that any
radical particularly anarchist social
theory would have to
self-consciously reject any trace of
vanguardism
to his mind ethnography as an
anthropological method provides a
particularly relevant if a rough and
incipient model of how non-vanguard is
revolutionary intellectual practice may
work
the goal of such a practice would not be
to arrive at the correct strategic
analysis and then lead the masses to
follow but to tease out the implicit
logics symbolic moral pragmatic that
already underline people's actions even
if they are themselves not completely
aware of them
one obvious role for a radical
intellectual is to do precisely that
graber rise in the fragments
to look at those who are creating viable
alternatives try to figure out what
might be the larger implications of what
they are already doing and then offer
those ideas back not as prescriptions
but as contributions
gives
not prescriptions but contributions
possibilities gives
that is what graber did in his work
particularly in the fragments of an
anarchist anthropology direct action and
ethnography and the democracy project
whether his gifts were accepted or not
by everyone he wrote about thought and
acted with or for that matter was read
by
after all gifts too can be rejected and
as graber recognized not much of what he
proposed or practiced as an
anthropologist had much to do with what
anthropology even radical anthropology
has actually been like over the last
hundred years or so
he says
nevertheless in the fragments graber
turns to anthropologists most notably
marcel miles to reflect on his influence
on anarchists despite the fact that
mouse had nothing good to say about
anarchists themselves
in the end though graber writes as if
speaking about himself
marcel mouse has probably had more
influence on anarchists than all the
other anthropologists combined
this is because he says
he was interested in alternative
moralities which opened the way to
thinking that societies without states
and markets were the word the way they
were because they actively wish to live
that way
which in our terms means because they
were anarchists in so far as fragments
of an anarchist anthropology do already
exist they largely drop
drive from him encore
in my interpretation graber's own
interest in developing an anarchist
anthropology
too was driven by an appreciation of and
fascination by alternative moralities
that underpin people's self-conscious
determination to live otherwise
in the anarchist case free from
capitalism and patriarchy free from the
state structural violence inequality and
domination
this is what i mean by alternative
ethics graber explains in a critical
section of the fragments where he
theorizes revolutionary counter power
and foreshadows a core argument he
co-authors in the dawn of everything
he says
anarchistic societies are no more
unaware of human capacities for greed
and vainglory than modern americans are
unaware of human capacities for envy
gluttony or sloth they would just find
them equally unappealing as the basis
for their civilization
in fact they see this phenomena as moral
dangers so dire they end up organizing
much of their social life around
containing them encode
i think this is a remarkable proposition
first it is determined to cast ethics
and morality as the constitutive
self-conscious grounds of social
organization
second it intimates this to be the case
across human history modern or
pre-modern
in fact graber argues that any really
politically engaged anthropology will
have to start by seriously confronting
the question of what if anything really
divides what we like to call the modern
world from the rest of human history
uncle
in the fragments as well as in the dawn
of everything he passionately rejects
familiar historical periodizations and
evolutionary stages such that the
entirety of human history
history along with every society people
and civilization across time and space
becomes populated by examples of human
possibility enacted by decidedly
imaginative intelligent playful
experimental thoughtful creative and
politically self-conscious creatures
for graber human history does not
consist of a series of revolutions be it
the neolithic revolution the
agricultural revolution the french
revolution or the industrial revolution
that introduce clear social moral or
political breaks in the nature of social
reality or the human condition as he
prefers to think of it
if this is the case
if this is the case and if anarchism is
above all an ethics of practice as
graber insists
such an ethics becomes available for
anthropological study and political
inspiration alike across human history
it is important to note however that
graper passionately disagrees with
primitivist anarchists inspired by his
anthropologist mentor martial sheldon's
influential essay the original affluent
society
anarchists who proposed that there was a
time when alienation and inequality did
not exist when everyone was a
hunter-gathering anarchist and that
therefore real liberation can only come
if we abandon civilization encode
in the fragments and the dawn of
everything he instead draws a more
complex history of endless variety where
for instance there were hunter-gatherer
societies with nobles and slaves and
agrarian societies that are fiercely
egalitarian
graper insists in other words that
humans never lived in the garden of eden
this is from the fragments 2004.
the significance of this finding is
manifold among other things it means
that history can become a resource for
us he says in much more interesting ways
and that radical theorists no longer
have to
pour endlessly over the same scanned 200
years of revolutionary history
writing of revolution in the fragments
graber rejects its commonplace
definition which could has always
implied something in the nature of a
paradigm shift a clear break a
fundamental rupture in the nature of
social reality after which everything
works differently and previous
categories no longer apply
instead he urges us to stop unquoting to
stop thinking about revolution as a
thing the revolution the great
cataclysmic break and instead ask what
is revolutionary action
he stresses that i called revolutionary
action is any collective action which
rejects and therefore confronts some
form of power or domination and in doing
so reconstitutes social relations even
within the collectivity in that light
without necessarily aiming the aiming to
topple a government or for that matter
the head of an anthropology department
now i mentioned this possibility in the
playful spirit of david to bring us back
to the here and now and to the final
section of the fragments titled
anthropology in which david
somehow reluctantly bites the hand that
feeds him
he says that's his own title
graber observes how instead of adopting
any kind of radical politics
anthropologists have risked becoming he
says yet another clock in a global
identity machine a planet-wide approach
apparatus of institutions and
assumptions whereby all debates about
the nature of political or economic
possibilities are seen to be over
and the only way he says one can now
make a political claim is by asserting
some group identity with all the
assumptions about what identity is
and bindingly he declares the
perspective of the anthropologists and
the global marketing executive have
become almost indistinguishable
but what does graber propose for
anthropology instead
observing that anthropologists are
effectively sitting on a vast archive of
human experience of social and political
experiments no one really knows about he
regrets that this archival human
experience is treated by anthropologists
as our dirty little secret
of course it was colonial violence that
made such an archive possible in the
first place as graber recognizes without
reluctance he says the discipline we
know today was made possible by horrific
schemes of conquest colonization and
mass murder much like most modern
academic disciplines
nevertheless he makes the remarkable
remarkably
daring proposition to my mind that i
could the fruits of ethnography and the
techniques of
ethnography could be enormously helpful
for radical movements around the world
if anthropologists if anthropologists he
says could get past their however
understandable hesitancy owing to their
own often squalid colonial history and
come to see what they're sitting on not
as some guilty secrets
but as the common property of humankind
encode
towards the conclusion i would like to
submit that anarchism and the
anthropological knowledge of anarchist
ethics practices and imaginaries across
human history are part of the common
property of humankind which now includes
graber's own contributions to anarchist
theory and practice along with his
astounding imagination of their possible
past and futures
allow me to end them with a strikingly
imaginative passage from the fragments
which we could receive as an invitation
to think and act towards an anarchist
future i could
anarchist forms of organization would
not look anything like a state
they would involve an endless variety of
communities associations networks
projects on every conceivable scale
overlapping and intersecting in any way
we could imagine and possibly many that
we can't
some would be quite local others global
perhaps all they would have in common is
that none would involve anyone showing
up with weapons and telling everyone
else to shut up and do what they were
told
since anarchists are not actually trying
to seize power within any national
territory the process of one system
replacing the other will not take the
form of some sudden revolutionary
cataclysm
the storming of a bastille the seizing
of a winter palace but will necessarily
be gradual
the creation of alternative forms of
organization on a world scale new forms
of communication new less alienated ways
of organizing life which will eventually
make currently existing forms of power
seem stupid and beside the point
that in turn would mean that there are
endless examples of viable anarchisms
pretty much any form of organization
would count as one so long as it was not
imposed by some higher authority
unquote
in the fragments of an anarchist
anthropology
riding on madagascar graber observes how
i could it often seems that no one
really takes on their full authority
until they are dead
to my mind we now have to deal with
david's full authority in an anarchist
spirit
the task at hand cannot be petrification
through idolization or canonization
but the extension of an invitation to
think play and experiment with his
contributions to anthropology and
anarchism alike
thank you
thank you thank you so much uh aisha
really wonderful um
i
uh
so we put up um
if you want to raise your hand uh to ask
a question that would be wonderful if
you can use the raise hand function
and i will invite you to the floor uh
you can also type in the chats
but the raised hand function is better
um
has any have i got any raised hands if
not i may
start with a question
oh fanella's got a question vanilla
would you would you like to
um hello alpe yes thank you and thanks
so much i really enjoyed listening to
both the speakers
um i was just reflecting on the sort of
um
lived realities of some of the themes on
which each of them touched and
um i don't know what was either what
either speaker would say um especially
perhaps kia
to the suggestion that um
there are maybe two different ways of
talking about and experiencing
collegiality
one of which would be a genuine
inhabitation of an organizational form
that sought to exceed hierarchical
expectations in institutions
and the other one would be
that rhetoric which had been parasitized
by
hierarchical and management forms within
institutions
and therefore um you know i i felt a
slight tension as i was listening to um
the conclusion of kier's talk
um in this discussion because it seems
to me that it didn't distinguish between
you know those those forms which had
been invaded by hierarchical forces
which is frequently also a mode in which
hierarchy
chooses to spread
so um i just i just wanted to sort of
add a little
a little footnote on on that which is i
suppose a kind of um
further kind of
fractal
kind of um addendum to the idea that one
couldn't have an ultimate solution to
these
to these issues but it's just a small
comment
thanks for that i care i shall would you
like to address that please
yes i mean i i can briefly address that
if you like and i thank you i think
that's a very
it's a very interesting and indeed
important comment and i think i mean i
was trying at the end there to say look
you know but rather than being a good
colleague i think what i was more
interested in talking about is
what is the performative effect on
social relations of the concept or the
category of the good colleague
as the category of the good colleague is
used amongst ourselves in academia
and um i'm certainly in favor of people
you know picking up their own socks and
doing their own marking and you know
trying to create
non
hierarchical situations where we take
care of each other and i think
that's very much what david's ideal kind
of anarchist community would look like
i think what i mean what i was trying to
draw attention to was the way in which
there's a tension within how the idea of
the good colleague is used
in contemporary academia because i think
it embodies both those things that
vanilla talked about simultaneously and
sometimes part of the moral confusion is
the way in which one use of that term
can seem from different perspectives to
embody either the you know the genuine
desire to look after each other in in an
academic community and at the same time
relationships of hierarchy and power and
i think what he's trying to do is to try
and dis in the same way that a concept
like democracy can you know the concept
of democracy is a very noble and
wonderful concept but it can be used to
justify
massacring and killing people at its
worst so one has to look at the context
in which the cern is being used and i
was just trying to sort of draw
attention to the ways i think in which
david was
somebody who perhaps wasn't always
considered by other people to be a good
colleague i think um
i tried to phrase that as carefully as i
can but i think that was a understanding
that some people had and all i wanted to
draw attention to was as i think vanilla
is drawing attention to but you know
that
sometimes being a good colleague means
doing some pretty bad things because of
the second aspect of collegiality that
often gets smuggled in
under the mask of the good stuff
it's interesting here because i think we
also maybe have to have a kind of
intersectional analysis here
um given that you know these definitions
have also been very subject to different
interpretations
by one's gendered positionality or other
starting point positionalities that
people may have
and
you know perhaps the best colleague is
the colleague who's both able to speak
the uncomfortable truth to power
um as david was so brilliant at doing
and liberate our imaginations as he was
so wonderful at doing which we so much
appreciated and missed and also pick up
one socks so that the women anarchists
are not picking up all the socks in the
anarchist um anarchist flats when they
get home from speaking truth to power so
i just um i'm just i'm offering a a
slightly kind of a frivolous um in a way
rejoinder in the spirit of your
invitation for
playful discussion um
that's my suggestion to you
and i mean
could i say i mean it might be put in a
frivolous sense but it's a really really
important point and my point is
certainly not to say that being a good
colleague is a bad thing and it's
certainly not to say
that one can't do both those things at
the same time
um i simply you know i was once
for my own personal reasons that some
people will be familiar with you know i
wanted to draw attention to the
occasions when david was a bad colleague
in a good way and i think that it's
important we're able to have a
discussion that does take into account
the things that you talk about as well
that actually we all have to work hard
at being
a good colleague in the first sense and
a bad colleague in the second sense
sure
sure would you like to add anything
i mean i could i think
uh
both parties are right here
i think care is drawing attention to the
ways in which collegiality has been used
uh
against
people like uh david
to as a disciplinary mechanism but at
the same time i hear vanilla who's
absolutely right that there are gender
ways in which um the work that is not
done
in a department falls on others etc so
it's i think we should have an
intersectional analysis of this but i
hear a
collegiality as management speak you
know
um it's always it tends to be used by
management of universities to discipline
and sometimes fire and deny deny tenure
as i think david experienced at yale
um
but i saw the remark here kathy gardner
says good colleague can certainly be
using oppressive and course ways but
also can be about care and support to
the collective and i totally agree and i
think they would
uh would have agreed with that in theory
thanks
um
do we have other questions if not i may
ask a question myself we have two people
sophia wood woodman and
lim
zhao
sofia first
yeah um you're not to know
that my name is pronounced sapphire just
in case anybody would like technologies
no problem nobody's nobody can know from
this spelling so i just wanted to thank
you
or lse for organizing this series and
it's it's such a wonderful opportunity
to have these conversations
and i wanted to say um and thanks
for the two interventions which
point me to
uh there is something very liberating
about what the that book does to say
um you know let's be honest about our
uh
our engagement with this
world and our uh there's no pose
give up your pose as a
disinterested scholar
and and say uh where where you are and
also
the the i want to erase the manner of
the saying as an important part of um
what i value about david's work and this
work and other work that that is also
part of that commitment is to say this i
mean it's not
yeah it's not to say it's not a complex
book and there are lots of complex ideas
but he's always committed to playing it
in a way
that is for everybody and and and
in a way that's sort of good colleague
discussion is also about
opening the academy to people who who
who have value valid
and valuable intellectual contributions
who are not part of our
little cliques and so on so that was one
point i wanted to raise but um another
thing that i
um
really value is the
focus on
um
joy celebration
um and the importance of that in
um human
uh
in it's part of the human condition and
um
that that
that is a central part of his
work and a sort of
thread running through this book that i
i think is the crucial element of some
of his arguments that one of the reasons
people might choose that kind of
community is to capture their time to
have
fun
thanks uh sophia i'm i'm gonna open the
mic for lim lim xiao please um we'll
hear from you and maybe take one or two
more questions from the floor and then i
will give back the um
platform to aisha and care to pick up
what they'd like
uh so uh thank you very much i really
enjoy this session for both speakers
that give a wonderful speech uh so my
question is uh just like that uh in
terms of anarchism and emphasis on
non-statements of the hierarchies and
social cause and social contract that is
requires a perfect condition to eat in
in today's context they still
associate with the
[Music]
lgbt course as well
that's my question
thank you thanks so much um we have a
question uh from
oppo find x2 about anthropology from its
imperial use in colonies would you like
to unmute yourself and maybe ask your
question
are you with us
um i'll read the question anyway um can
we claim anthropology from its imperial
use in colonies or even knowledge to
begin with does knowledge and
epistemologies need a bit of anarchy too
um
yeah uh maybe it would be great to hear
kieran h's um perspective on this and if
i'm allowed to throw my own kind of
question uh on this i'm really kind of
um
really interested in um
you know okay let's in the spirit of the
extend the invitation to
talk to david and take him forward
um
uh i saw he read fragments as i was
writing the um i was finishing writing
in the shadows of the state
and um
uh
so i had this whole like end pit in in
the shadows of the state which was
resurrecting
um adivasi indigenous morality and
ethics and saying let's what can we
learn from them for a kind of new new
possibilities very much in the spirit of
fragments and you know it was
david was doing like exactly the same
thing that i was doing in in in the at
the end of in the shadows of the state
and and that's how we started talking to
each other
and um but over the years um i've been
so torn by this right because i do want
to
resurrect the kind of moral and ethical
possibilities that um
indigenous societies in india offer us
to think about the world differently but
at the same time those same societies
are completely stratified and um you
know um uh the the new state of
jacqueline that was formed the the chief
minister uh is now an adivasi or was an
adivasi
and was you know then embroiled in a
massive
scam of um offshore finance uh basically
got his hands dirty with multinational
corporations and had you know um
massive corruption scam
um and you know and now of course the
same so it's the same people that i
worked with are now torn between you
know on one hand they were joining the
next slides but now they're all turning
to the bjp
and massive supporters of the bjp right
um so i wanted to hear from both of you
i guess uh around on the place of well
care puts its social stratification
right
within those uh communities where we
find alternative possibilities which is
like key to fragments you know how you
know i mean david kind of always evades
this i question i feel uh in all of his
writings and in all of the conversations
i had with him but where do you find
answers to david in this and the fact
that all the communities that we're
working with that where all those
alternative communisms you know that
we're finding are are themselves totally
stratified
um i'm sure you've thought about this a
lot especially clear i'm really into you
know given your own work i'm interested
in in hearing where you see we take
david forward uh around this this which
to me is a really crucial issue for any
kind of alternative possibilities that
we as anthropologists
uh we as you know we can offer um
okay so that's that's um yeah
oh
perhaps we may show we've had three
already maybe we can we can have a
response on that and then i'll i'll pick
up any other things in chat
okay or you need to unmute yourself
um shall i uh
i should you wanna go first or should i
go first i'm easy either way
uh i don't have uh
a long response but uh alpha's last
question really stimulated me um
i think this lack of a garden of eden
is valid for our present too
there are utopic possibilities
egalitarian possibilities
in these alternative spaces alternative
ethics
that we explore but i think uh none of
them are pure
none of them are unproblematic and to
act otherwise would be some type of
betrayal to
you know and and in terms of the
fragments i was maybe this is the fourth
time i'm reading that text
and i think we haven't really explored
the part where uh david actually
theorizes revolutionary counterpower and
dual power situations and where he says
you know it's a very difficult section
of the fragments actually
where he talks about how the possibility
of violence
is ever present
even in situations of
revolutionary counterpower in practice
of course alpha you'll be very familiar
with this
my own um
approach to all these contradictions
is to
is to attempt to stare them in the face
but in my own ethnographic work it was
very difficult to come to terms with all
the inequalities and hierarchies that i
saw emerge even in explicitly
non-hierarchical
spaces so i think that's a tension that
we constantly
need to
hold in front of our minds and
write about them and think about them
and
as honestly as possible
i don't have a grand theory of why
that is the case if hierarchy is
inevitable or not
um
but i do want to have faith that it's
not inevitable
um
and that's a choice that's the choice
um wow okay yeah well there's a number a
number of things have come up and i'm
probably going to
not answer very well because there's now
too many things in my head and i will
probably forget certain things i should
mention
um but the first thing i mean how all
the the luck put that's the last things
first yes in a you know in a very
david-esque manner yes and let's uh if
we address what alpo is saying i think
the idea that um for example the whole
point of fragments and anchors
anthropology in many regards is that one
shouldn't be thinking about
the so-and-so people of another part of
the world as some kind of ideal
anarchic egalitarian alternative to us
whatever we might be
and
what i would suggest is when i work
amongst i worked in eastern britain
papua new guinea and the people i work
with are not exclusively but almost
exclusively people of a group known as
the tolai who were well documented in
the ethnographic record
um going back to the work of bill
epstein from the manchester school in
the late 50s and richard salisbury in
the 60s
and
my feeling is this is that although
societies in papua new guinea were
largely characterized as egalitarian
by anthropologists
of the colonial era
which was a very double-edged sword on
the one hand it was a way of maybe you
know it was that there was degree of
noble savaging going on and as people of
many people have observed the term
egalitarian was never really very well
defined what did you mean by egalitarian
when you refer to these societies as
egalitarian and indeed to bring it back
to the issue of gender as a number of
feminist scholars such as the set
josephides and other people pointed out
in the 80s egalitarian tend to mean
egalitarian amongst men and this in many
regards is the background for all the
interesting discussions that emerge
around the publication of gender of the
gift in the late 80s so i mean the point
here being is that
a even in a kind of allegedly pure
manner i don't think it's necessarily
helpful to go looking for as we might
put it pure egalitarianism and then when
i look at a place like eastern britain
the gazelle peninsula where people toe
like people have been conducting cash
cropping on their own customary land for
over 120 years where massive social
inequalities and economic inequalities
have grown up over decades
to do with their entanglement in global
markets it doesn't make any sense
anymore to start looking for some kind
of pure form of egalitarianism there
these are i would argue
class divided societies just as much as
britain or norway are
so
the starting point is not to be
endlessly looking for the pure and
perfect other of what we imagine
ourselves to be but to look at the
particular dynamics of how hierarchies
come into being and also how hierarchies
are resisted or walked away from in
those contexts and i think that to my
mind i mean once you accept the idea
that you know as the old world systems
theorists would have put it back in the
70s that you know this you know people
like wallace stein or eric wolff that
this is a globally interconnected
totality it shouldn't be surprising that
we find you know connections that cause
different kinds of inequality to be
emerging but to be resist in different
ways in different places so i'm not
surprised to hear the kinds of stories
that alpha describes because they're
very familiar to me from from papua new
guinea in many regards
when it comes i i'm sorry i kind of the
the internet here cut out around um
uh uh around the point that the the lim
jiao that you got to the
question part of what you were saying so
i'm afraid to say i completely missed
the question um so just apologies for
not addressing that
um
one thing i would like to say though is
that
the first contribution the first
question about it being fun
absolutely
if anthropology and academia and indeed
if revolution is not fun if it's not
playful there is no point to it
and i'm reminded of the other you know
the situation is right around any game
who wrote this you know this famous
quote i think it was taken up in the
streets in 68 you know that those people
who speak of revolution without speaking
of the contradictions of everyday life
those people speak with a corpse in
their mouth
and i think it's also true that those
people who speak about revolution
which is supposed to be about giving us
back a spirit of human freedom from
oppressive hierarchy from the demands of
the market or whatever it might be
if you speak about those things in a
term with absolutely no enjoyment no
vitality
there's nothing revolutionary to it and
i think the great gift that david gave
was to consistently
speak about these things
with an element of playfulness to remind
us that this is not just simply a dry
and married intellectual engagement but
it is about giving ourselves a world
where we can have a bit more fun and
that's important as well
thanks kit um i've got stefan
stefan do you want to uh unmute yourself
stefan
great and now just the mic as well
please
i've unmuted and i can be seen
perfect okay
i wanted to
particularly ask aja asa
um
what
you did you ever asked
david about the law
um
because what seems to me to be
entirely missing
in the dawn of everything
um when
when he and wenger the other david
uh
sets out the three elements of a
state that's
charisma by some kind of contestation
um
and and uh
[Music]
violence which is sovereignty um and
i forgot what the third one is now but
they don't include
uh oh yes knowledge uh secret knowledge
through bureaucracy
um
especially that last one does not
include law
yes it does
it it does david
well you know it's never stated to be
law what do you think knowledge is
well for christ's sake everything is
knowledge
everything is the subject of knowledge
and
and and as an and an object of knowledge
that's that's uh that's that's just a
cop-out no it isn't
it is because not everything is
knowledge is a form of domination which
is what you're talking about
no i'm not i'm asking about the question
of
the
organization
that's required when you think about
the the uh
an association that covers
global affairs for instance
that
is a question of
law and sanctions on law of sanctions
again against law breakers i'm happy for
aisha to answer but you're talking about
three forms of domination not knowledge
per se
david
i want also to
yeah
well i can't answer on behalf of the
davids but i can say
something about i mean i teach a course
called law and violence
the main idea being that law is a form
of violence
um
so
yeah i
but you're not interested in what i
think and i don't know what they would
i'm interested in what you think that's
why i ask you the question okay
so um you know there's a section in the
fragments where
david graber
says anarchy is never tired of reminding
of the man with the stick
who shows up in spaces otherwise thought
to be free
otherwise thought to be
spaces of
freedom but when there is a rule
that is broken the man with the stick
comes
and
you know that's the law
i i in my own thinking uh
wouldn't allow me
to
posit law
as ultimately compatible with a
non-violent
arrangement of social relations
thanks aisha um to end with i am going
to invite um a question on ethnography
which i think is actually addressed in
fragments and maybe clear might be able
to
um uh look at this question uh and
elaborate on it my question this is from
um sundeep
uh sandy pun
uh my question is what implication
anarchist anthropology has on how we do
ethnography to understand existing
moralities how do we capture the
existing without losing it well while
try with with while translating i guess
this is what what um what what sundeepan
meant um uh
maybe if we have a kind of last
reflection on the relationship between
ethnography um and the anarchist
anthropology and i know there's section
in fragments which addresses this
clear my hand and the floor to you as
our final question
oh
oh dear because you've asked me a
question that
although i feel the pressure as a
reasonably senior academic to have a
kind of ready answer for every difficult
question i will just
fess up straight away and say that i'm
not entirely sure what the answer to
that is and if uh i don't remember that
section from the book despite having
read it two days ago again um because my
memory of france is anthropology is very
much the
when he's talking about ethnography at
least a lot of it is a reflection upon
to what extent
we as anarchists if we are anarchists
can use ethnography in different ways
from the kinds of romantic
appropriations we're used to using
maybe i've completely blotted this with
my mind but i don't remember much
discussion in the book about how
anarchism might inform the practice of
ethnography
so how might to speculate wildly how my
anarchism
influenced the practice of ethnography
and i don't think i have any
particularly
smart or clever answers to give there
and again i betray the insecurity i feel
now that i've been put on the spot and
asked to be smart and clever and i am
floundering but
how might this kind of anarchism
impact how we do ethnography i think the
vision of anarchism that david lays out
is one that suggests that as we
mentioned earlier we should be looking
rather than for grand overall theories
of different kinds of social structures
or different kinds of ontologies or
different kinds of cultural systems we
should be as david or rau van agan were
aware alert contradictions of everyday
life and it is imposed
more battles over value as david puts it
in another piece out of which universes
are born that we pay and take seriously
not trying to solve philosophical
questions of our own academic reflection
but the living moral contradictions of
everyday life by which people seek to
withdraw from oppressive obligations and
seek to build a life more worth living i
think that's the most important thing
and that therefore as a consequence and
this brings us back to our story that in
any context
we begin with a degree of justified
skepticism
of the official story of the particular
group that is told to us by the
gatekeepers
and this is i think brings us back to
the earlier conversation about good
collegiality which is that we all agree
with the kiddies is a good thing but
we're also aware that in the mouths of
certain individuals good collegiality is
something that is a weapon that is used
to promote its opposite in the mouth of
certain individuals and when we do field
work with any group of people we should
be on the i think david that anarchism
would imply we should always be on the
on
the lookout
for really nice sounding phrases that
are being used by certain people to do
their opposite
whether it's collegiality
whether it's democracy
whether on some occasions it's
decolonizing whatever it might be
we should always be thinking
who benefits from the use of this
particular term at this particular
moment and conducting our ethnography
accordingly
thank you care i sure if you'd like to
have a last word um
you know uh
this section in the fragments where
david talks about ethnography as
possibility i find it really hopeful
actually almost too hopeful
about the possibilities of ethnography
it immediately makes me think of
ethnographic resistance
um
and it the possib is ever-present
possibility of emerging i also want to
merge my comment with somebody there's
an amazing discussion happening in the
chat by the way that i've been
distracted by following
um
about epistemic diversity and do we not
need some anarchism when it comes to
epistemology and
the of the kinds of authority that
anthropologists mobilize
especially in
while they're doing
ethnography um
i think to be able to reflect
seriously
on how anarchism could contribute to
ethnography and vice versa
we need to reflect on a very
uncomfortable
very uncomfortable matter which is
ethnographic resistance
and i think if we do that
seriously we may
find out what possibilities there really
are
to be honest i find uh david greber a
bit too hopeful
um in that regard
i mean there's a really nice section in
fragments which talks about ethnography
as a form of direct democratic process
and in the same way that he he
resurrects our whole kind of colonial
heritage
uh um of of you know all these archives
of different societies that we have he
also resurrects ethnography uh as um as
a tool for the future as a form of
direct democratic process
yes that's the beautiful part that's the
hopeful part but how many of us are able
to imagine
ethnography as that consensus-building
democratic process that's all i'm saying
if we can do that
yes ethnography can be a liberatory
uh tool as the way david imagined
thank you thank you to everybody for
participating in this session thank you
for this incredible like chat comments
as well which um you know lots of
conversations going on and uh
it's lovely to see i haven't been able
to keep up with everything because you
can't as chair but um lots of things
that catching my eye too
um
we see you all next week um and uh until
then have a great week and thank you so
much to kier and to aisha
for discussing fragments with us and
bringing us together
thank you
today there's no informal session
because our speakers have to go off to
other things